---------- p. 151 ----------

Russia in the 1990s–early 21st century

With the breakup of the USSR a new period in the history of Russia began—a period of difficult transition to a new economic model, to a new political system, and to new foreign-policy relations. The initial phases of this period are considered the most difficult and dramatic for the people of Russia. As a result of the collapse of the unified Soviet economic and economic-management system, there was a decline in production, a surge of inflation, and poverty among the population. The radical economic reform that received the name “shock therapy,” and the lifting of price controls at the beginning of 1992, made the situation in the country even worse. Prices for most essential goods rose tens of times. The money deposits of the population, accumulated over many long years, in fact lost their value. As a result of the liberalization of trade, the country was filled with imported goods. Plants and factories closed on a mass scale. The economic crisis also struck the agrarian sector. Collective farms (kolkhozes) and state farms (sovkhozes) and enterprises that processed agricultural products found themselves in an extremely difficult financial position. There was a shortage of fertilizers, grain-harvesting equipment, combines, and motor vehicles. In this period the first garden associations, cooperatives, personal subsidiary plots, and farms appeared, which used rented agricultural machinery. The voucher privatization of state property that began in 1992 did not bring the expected result and did not improve the material situation of the country’s population. According to the government’s plan, all citizens of Russia had the right to an equal share in state property. For this purpose each Russian was issued a privatization voucher (voucher) with a face value of 10,000 rubles. But people, not knowing what to do with the vouchers, either sold them or invested them in numerous dubious investment companies and funds. In the end the majority of the country’s population received nothing from privatization and did not

---------- p. 152 ----------

become owners. And only a narrow group of people, making up about ten percent of Russia’s population, seized the greater part of the country’s national wealth, buying the best enterprises at clearly understated prices. According to an assessment by the State Duma, the damage inflicted on Russia’s economy by privatization was 2.5 times greater than the volume of the Soviet Union’s losses in the years of the Great Patriotic War and amounted to 2 trillion US dollars. As a result of privatization, having lost sources of revenue, the state for months failed to pay wages to workers, teachers, scientists, doctors, and employees of law-enforcement agencies. Unemployment and the “brain drain” to foreign countries grew at a rapid pace. The social protection of the majority of the population—pensioners, large families, single mothers, people with disabilities, and orphaned children—was weakened. Funding of the Armed Forces was significantly reduced, which led to a weakening of the country’s defense capability and put Russia’s national security under threat. The military-industrial complex—the heart of Soviet industry—fell into decline. In 1995, at almost a quarter of the total number of defense enterprises that produced the most high-technology output, joint firms with the participation of foreign charter capital were created. Russian science, which only a few years earlier had occupied the leading positions in the world, was reduced to a lamentable state. Irreparable damage was inflicted on the country’s culture. Libraries, houses of culture, stations of young technicians, and Pioneer camps were destroyed as unnecessary or converted into entertainment and amusement establishments. Crime, especially organized crime, grew to unprecedented proportions. Criminal groups, in close connection with corrupt officials, penetrated the structures of power, the economy, and law-enforcement agencies, and placed

---------- p. 153 ----------

industrial enterprises, banks, trade, the drug business, the gambling business, and so on under their control. Socio-political life was also not distinguished by stability. In many autonomous republics separatist sentiments grew stronger. Calls were heard for leaving the Russian Federation. Some regions openly sabotaged federal laws, refused to transfer taxes to the federal budget, and demanded economic privileges from the Center for their territories. In 1992 a split occurred in the country’s top leadership, which at the end of 1993 led to an acute conflict between the President and the Supreme Soviet. The situation was resolved by a decree of the President of Russia, B. N. Yeltsin, on the dissolution of the Supreme Soviet and the abolition of the system of Soviets at all levels. On 12 December 1993 elections were held to a new parliament—the State Duma—and a referendum on a new Constitution of Russia. In accordance with the new Constitution, the Russian Federation became a presidential-parliamentary republic. The main destabilizing factor in Russia’s socio-political development in 1994–1996 was the “Chechen war.” The introduction of troops into Chechnya in December 1994 with the aim of restoring constitutional order did not lead to the republic’s submission to the laws of the federation as a whole. On 16 August 1996, in the village of Novye Atagi (Khasavyurt District of Dagestan), the “Khasavyurt Accords” were concluded between the Russian Federation and the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria, according to which the decision of the question of Chechnya’s status was postponed until 2001. In 1997 a certain economic stabilization began to take shape in the country. The fall of the ruble’s exchange rate slowed. In some branches of industry production growth began. However, the financial crisis that broke out on 17 August 1998

---------- p. 154 ----------

and the many-fold fall of the ruble’s exchange rate wiped out the positive trend that had begun in the country’s economy. As a result of the crisis the people’s living conditions worsened still more. The crisis also had some positive consequences. Because of high prices, the import of foreign goods declined, which in the subsequent period had a favorable effect on the development of domestic production. The instability of the socio-political situation in the country is also shown by the fact that from April 1998 to August 1999 Russia had 4 prime ministers in succession. On 9 August 1999 Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin was appointed to the post of Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation. V. V. Putin’s appointment as Chairman of the Government coincided with the beginning of a counter-terrorist operation by federal forces in the North Caucasus. V. V. Putin headed this operation. On 31 December 1999 B. N. Yeltsin announced his resignation from the post of President. V. V. Putin became Acting President of Russia. On 26 March 2000 Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin was elected the new President of the Russian Federation. With the election of V. V. Putin as President of the country a new period in the development of the Russian Federation begins—a period of strengthening the political, economic, and defense power of the state, of the revival of the country’s spiritual and cultural unity and of its international positions. Under the leadership of V. V. Putin it proved possible to reverse the situation of the parade of sovereignties and of separatism, which had threatened the integrity of the Russian state. The war with international terrorism, supported by centers of power from abroad, was won. The Chechen Republic was returned to Russia’s constitutional field and turned into the most stable and rapidly developing region of the country.

---------- p. 155 ----------

A state vertical of power was built. The Russian Federation was administratively divided into eight federal districts, and the legal base of Russia’s regions was brought into line with federal legislation. The powers of the federal center, the regions, and local self-government bodies were delimited, and the level of responsibility of local authorities was also raised. The role of the Federation Council of the Federal Assembly of Russia was strengthened. The upper chamber is formed by representatives of the country’s regions—two representatives from each constituent entity of the Russian Federation—elected by regional parliaments or appointed by the heads of the regions. The state succeeded in placing under its control the revenues from the extraction of hydrocarbons. An enormous gold and foreign-currency reserve was accumulated, and virtually all external debts were eliminated. In this period not only did receipts into the federal budget grow, but citizens’ incomes also increased—wages, pensions, benefits, stipends, and other social payments. Naturally, the standard of living of a considerable part of the population rose. Thanks to these positive steps, V. V. Putin succeeded in stopping the process of Russia’s slide into a political and economic abyss. On 14 March 2004 V. V. Putin was popularly elected President of the Russian Federation for a second time, having secured the support of more than 71 percent of the voters who took part in the voting. The priority directions of Russia’s state policy in the period of V. V. Putin’s second presidential term were proclaimed to be the overcoming of poverty, reform of the Armed Forces, and transformations in the housing sphere. In the presidential address to the Federal Assembly on 10 May 2006, V. V. Putin especially stressed the need to attach important significance to questions of demography and the family.

---------- p. 156 ----------

Beginning in 2006, the priority national projects “Health,” “Education,” “Housing,” and “Development of the Agro-Industrial Complex” began to be carried out in the country. Despite the positive appeals of a broad Russian public, of the heads of republics, of leaders of the party and of public organizations, and of figures of science and culture to V. V. Putin, he decided not to take part in the elections of the President of Russia as a candidate. As a result, on 7 May 2008 Dmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev was elected President of Russia; before his election to the post of head of state he had been responsible in the Government of Russia for the practical implementation of the aforementioned national projects of a socio-economic character. V. V. Putin, for his part, took the post of Chairman of the Government, at the same time heading the United Russia party. On 26 May 2008 V. V. Putin announced a reduction of taxes and an increase of various social payments to veterans and other categories of citizens. Also in the period of V. V. Putin’s premiership, on his initiative pensions and maternity capital were raised. Beginning in 2008, the average size of the labor pension in Russia increased 2.5 times. Russia’s external debt by the end of the period of V. V. Putin’s premiership amounted to less than 10%. This was one of the best indicators in the world not only among the countries of the “Group of Eight,” but also of the “Group of Twenty” and BRICS. In this time inflation declined from 13.3 percent to 6.1 percent. In the newest history of Russia such a low level of inflation had never existed. In 2010 construction of the Chita–Khabarovsk highway was completed. For the first time in Russian history the Far East was integrated into the national automobile network. At the beginning of 2012 the volume of Russia’s GDP exceeded the pre-crisis level. Russia’s economy fully overcame the consequences of the downturn of 2008–2009 and partly even of 2010. The volume of Russia’s GDP in 2008 prices amounted, according to the results of 2011, to more

---------- p. 157 ----------

than 41 trillion rubles.

V. V. Putin, during his work as Chairman of

the Government of the Russian Federation, signed 11,623 documents.

In the presidential elections held in Russia on 4 March 2012, still in the first round and with a large lead over the other contenders for the post of head of state, V. V. Putin won. Having become head of state, V. V. Putin continued the course toward strengthening the state that he had begun in his previous periods of the presidency. In Russia’s prospective (medium-term) plans it is envisaged that the country will enter the top five leading world economies. The government intends to invest tens of billions of dollars over ten years in the modernization and expansion of social, industrial, and transport infrastructure. The plans for implementing electric-power development projects by 2020 are grandiose. 480 billion dollars was envisaged for these purposes. If over the entire Soviet period 30 nuclear reactors were built in the country, then over the next several years Russia plans to put 26 similar facilities into operation. The Russian company Russian Railways (RZD) intends by 2030 to spend 400 billion dollars on the modernization and expansion of the railway network. 30 billion US dollars will be allocated for the construction of airports. The practical embodiment of these projects and of many others on which the Government of Russia is working will transform all of Russia. Such a “bottleneck” as the shortage of electric power, which is already beginning to hold back nationwide economic growth, will be eliminated. The fragmentation of the economy will be reduced. The result of this may be a new industrialization of Siberia and the Russian Far East. Today Russia’s growth, strength, and power cannot be stopped by external sanctions and pressure. Of course, the anti-Russian sanctions of the United States and its allies have complicated the situation in some

---------- p. 158 ----------

branches of Russian industry, but they were not able to fundamentally hinder the development of its economy. The Russian economy, thanks to the margin of strength created in previous years, on the whole coped with the difficulties, did not collapse, and “was not torn to shreds.” Despite the world financial and economic crisis and sanctions pressure, the fall of GDP in 2015 slowed, amounting to a little more than 4 percent. The country’s positive trade balance is maintained, the volume of exports of non-resource products and of products with a high degree of processing is growing, and the overall level of inflation is declining. Russia, by the volume of gold and foreign-currency reserves, which in August 2016 amounted to 392.756 billion US dollars, occupied 6th place in the world. The volume of the Government’s Reserve Fund on 1 August 2016 amounted to 2.56 trillion rubles, and the volume of the second fund—the National Wealth Fund—to 4.84 trillion rubles. The Government of Russia succeeded in holding back the growth of unemployment. In the middle of 2016 it amounted to 5.7 percent of the working-age part of society. Russia is gradually overcoming the resource character of its economy. The comprehensive development of Russia’s economy that has been observed since the beginning of the 2000s, and the successes achieved by the country over two decades, refute the widespread stereotype according to which Russia supposedly cannot offer the outside world anything except oil and gas. In March 2016 revenues from the non-resource sector of the economy amounted to 66 percent of the total volume of receipts into the federal budget. Revenues of non-resource branches by March 2016—compared with the same period of 2015—grew by 10.49 percent. Over the past three years—after 2012—a large volume of goods was produced for delivery abroad. For example, in 2015—compared with 2012—exports of polyester fibers increased by 450 percent, of X-ray equipment by

---------- p. 159 ----------

225 percent, of artificial joints by 320 percent, of household washing machines by 102 percent. Within the framework of the state target program “Pharma-2020,” directed at the development of the domestic pharmaceutical industry, 160 projects are being implemented. It was expected that by 2018 complex types of prostheses would consist 95 percent of elements developed in Russia, and that 55 percent of the computer tomographs installed in clinics would be of domestic production. In 2020 the share of domestic medicines on the country’s internal market was to amount to no less than 40 percent. Russia is a world leader in the field of developing new technologies for nuclear power. Now Russia accounts for 41 percent of the total number of nuclear reactors being built in the world. In 2014 the volume of Russia’s foreign contracts reached 100.3 billion dollars, having increased—compared with 2013—by 26.3 billion US dollars. Impressive successes have been achieved in agriculture. This is to a greater degree connected with the implementation of the import-substitution program. Today Russia occupies sixth place among countries that export agricultural products. In 2015 the growth of production of agricultural products made it possible to reduce imports and increase exports of agricultural products and food. Today the Russian countryside fully supplies the country with grain, oil, sugar, and potatoes. In the 2014–2015 agricultural year one of the largest grain harvests in history was gathered in Russia—105.3 million tons. This made it possible to substantially increase the volume of grain exports, which reached more than 30 million tons. In 2015 production of dairy products grew—compared with 2014—by 3.6 percent, of butter by 8.7 percent, of cheese by 29 percent, of fish and fish products by 6 percent, of meat by 12–13 percent.

---------- p. 160 ----------

The agrarian sector proved to be one of the branches where the volumes of lending have a tendency to increase. In 2015 Rosselkhozbank issued credits to agricultural producers for a total sum of about 600 billion rubles, which is 150 billion rubles more than in 2014. Over the last 4 years—after 2012—more than 12 thousand beginning farmers became grant recipients. In 2015 alone grants supported 4.5 thousand farms. The state also helps in the creation of fruit orchards. For these purposes 2.3 billion rubles was allocated in 2015. In the same year orchards were planted in Russia on an area of 12.6 thousand hectares. Notable successes have also marked such strategic and promising branches of the Russian economy as the production of armaments, machine building, shipbuilding, aircraft building, the production of scientific research equipment, machine-tool building, electronics, and others. These achievements are an indicator of the high scientific-production level and potential of Russian industry, which is capable of satisfying both the needs of the country and of meeting the contemporary requirements of the global market. The Russian Federation conducts an open, predictable, and pragmatic multi-vector foreign policy that corresponds to its national interests and rests on unconditional respect for international law. Beginning in February 2013, the Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation, approved by a decree of the President of Russia, has been implemented; its main tasks are: – ensuring the reliable security of the country; – influencing worldwide processes with the aim of forming a stable, just, and democratic world order; – creating favorable external conditions for the progressive development of Russia;

---------- p. 161 ----------

– forming a belt of good-neighborliness around the perimeter of Russia’s borders, seeking agreement and coinciding interests with foreign countries and interstate associations in the process of solving the tasks determined by Russia’s national priorities; – protecting the rights and interests of Russian citizens and compatriots abroad, promoting a positive perception of the Russian Federation in the world. Close, fruitful, respectful, and mutually beneficial relations with the countries of the CIS are a priority direction, in the words of V. V. Putin, the “core” of Russia’s foreign policy. With Russia’s active participation a number of regional interstate organizations have been created. In 2002 the system of the Collective Security Treaty (CST) was transformed into the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), which united in its format Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Belarus, and Armenia. In 2000 the Eurasian Economic Community—abbreviated EurAsEC—was created, which included Russia, Kazakhstan, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, while Armenia, Moldova, and Ukraine became observers. EurAsEC ended its functioning in connection with the creation of the EAEU. In June 2001 the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) was established. Russia, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan entered it as full members, and later India and Pakistan. Observer status is held by Afghanistan, Belarus, Iran, and Mongolia. An important milestone in the newest history of Russia was V. V. Putin’s speech on 10 February 2007 at the Munich Conference on Security Policy. In his speech V. V. Putin spoke harshly and critically about the imperial-hegemonist foreign-policy course of the United States and the concept of a unipolar

---------- p. 162 ----------

world. The head of the Russian state drew attention to the growth of tension in the world after the breakup of the USSR and stressed that the expansion of NATO and the American program for creating missile defense near Russia’s borders are destabilizing factors in world politics. V. V. Putin’s speech was the speech of the leader of a revived and strengthened democratic Russia and, in essence, gave rise to the complex process of forming a multipolar world. A demonstration of Russia’s readiness for decisive actions in the international arena was the operation to force Georgia to peace in August 2008. Then the country’s leadership, despite pressure from the entire Western world and the attacks of a Russophobic opposition, took the decision to give a firm rebuff to Georgia’s large-scale military aggression against the peaceful population of South Ossetia. This inhumane act, in the course of which about 2,000 civilians and 74 peacekeepers died, and more than half of the population of South Ossetia was left without shelter, was committed with the approval of the United States of America. The American leadership, knowing that Russia would not leave unanswered an armed attack on defenseless people and on its own peacekeepers, counted on presenting it as the aggressor. But this plan-scheme did not succeed. Thanks to the skillful work of Russian diplomacy and the Russian media, the world learned the real truth about the terrible events in Tskhinvali. A true geopolitical breakthrough after the breakup of the Soviet Union was the creation of the Eurasian Economic Union in May 2014. This regional economic association at present includes five countries—Russia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. Today the EAEU, whose “doors” are open for the accession of other countries, is increasingly capturing, as an interstate project, the minds of millions of people in the countries of the former USSR. An event of enormous historical significance was the return of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol to Russia.

---------- p. 163 ----------

The inhabitants of the Crimean Peninsula and of the hero-city of Sevastopol—after the armed coup d’état in Ukraine in February 2014—declared at the historic referendum of 16 March 2014 that they wanted to live in the Russian multinational family. The Russian Federation satisfied the wish of the Crimeans and the Sevastopol residents. Despite the fact that the procedure of the accession of Crimea to the Russian Federation was carried out in full accordance with international law, the Ukrainian leadership did not recognize the legality of this act and called Russia an “aggressor.” Another factor that clouds relations between the neighboring countries is the continuing conflict in Donbas—one of the important parts of the Russian World. There residential neighborhoods are being shelled, and peaceful people are dying. In February 2015 the Minsk agreements were concluded between the parties to the conflict—with the mediation of Russia, France, and Germany, as well as the OSCE. However, today it has become obvious to many in the world that the present Ukrainian political leadership, for well-known reasons, is by definition incapable of fulfilling the key provisions of these agreements. The Russian Federation is a strong, independent in almost all respects, self-sufficient state. But Russia’s main strength is in its sincerity, justice, peacefulness, and striving to defend the right of peoples and countries to real sovereignty and to the choice of their own path of development. Upon Russia, as a great power, both history and international law, enshrined in the UN Charter, have placed the responsibility for maintaining peace and security throughout the world. The fact that today the question of Iran’s nuclear problem has been removed from the international agenda and that the Syrian Arab Republic has avoided the tragic fate of Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya, and other countries is vivid proof that the Russian Federation is returning to itself the status of a great world power, in order to establish a multipolar structure in the system of international relations.

---------- p. 164 ----------

Russia’s leading role in the struggle against the forces of international terrorism is recognized by the entire world community. Precisely after the beginning of the special operation of Russia’s Aerospace Forces in Syria, carried out at the request of the government of that country, the balance of forces in the region changed. The advance of ISIS, that terrible enemy of contemporary civilization, was stopped, the legitimate authority and statehood of Syria were strengthened, and a beginning was laid for a peaceful dialogue of the Syrian government with the opposition. With Russia’s help the Armed Forces of Syria seized the strategic initiative and continue to advance in order to finally liberate their land from terrorists. In 2022 Russian statehood will turn 1,160 years old. Throughout this long historical path Russia more than once faced challenges that threatened its sovereignty. And each time Russia succeeded not only in defending its independence, but also in coming out of the situation that had taken shape stronger. So it was after the Time of Troubles of the beginning of the 17th century, the Patriotic War of 1812, and the Great Patriotic War of 1941–1945. There is no doubt that the Russian Federation, with its ability to defend its legitimate national interests, with a spiritually and morally rich multinational people welded together by a thousand-year history, having overcome the difficulties connected with the anti-Russian sanctions of the West, will turn into a powerful and prosperous democratic country and will play an active, initiative-taking, and constructive role in the contemporary world order. At the beginning of 2019 the process of implementing national projects started in Russia. All these achievements and the planning of large-scale transformations became possible only because V. V. Putin, once again popularly re-elected (76.69% of the votes) to the post of head of state on 18 March 2018, placed at the center of his policy a concrete person—the citizen of the Russian Federation. This is convincingly attested by the clearly expressed socially oriented actions of the Russian leader in

---------- p. 165 ----------

2020 in the conditions of the coronavirus pandemic and in connection with the introduction of amendments to the country’s Constitution. V. V. Putin first brought Russia out of a state of deadlock and then gave it a strong push forward on the path of overcoming backwardness by means of the maximum use of the possibilities of the technological revolution, of making a leap in raising the quality of people’s lives, in the modernization of the economy, infrastructure, and state administration. National projects are large-scale development programs that cover all spheres of life of Russian society—demography, healthcare, education, culture, housing and the urban environment, ecology, road construction, labor productivity and employment, science, the digital economy, small and medium-sized entrepreneurship, international cooperation and exports. The development and launch of these national projects became possible thanks to the enormous work done in previous years to give the economy a new quality. For only an economy that has received a foundation for powerful development can handle large-scale programs for the implementation of which colossal financial resources are required—almost 26 trillion rubles. The goal of the national projects initiated by President Vladimir Putin and designed for the period until 2024 is to concentrate administrative and budget resources and to direct them toward a substantial improvement of the quality of people’s lives. The national projects, like everything that Vladimir Putin plans, are built around the interests of the person, so that every Russian would have comfortable living conditions, work corresponding to his or her abilities and a decent wage, could receive a good education, accessible and high-quality medicine, and have the opportunity to live in an ecologically favorable environment. The implementation of the national projects will allow Russia to change radically. Over the coming six years, in the economy

---------- p. 166 ----------

growth rates above world rates are envisaged, and the country’s entry into the number of the five largest economies of the world. Over this period, 1.5 million new apartments and 300 thousand new individual houses, 40 new and reconstructed children’s departments and hospitals, 230 thousand new places in schools, 245 technology parks for children and 345 children’s technology parks in the countryside will be put into operation annually, 80 thousand km of regional and intra-city roads will be repaired, 50 airports will be reconstructed, and dozens of scientific centers of world level will be created. The national projects should also help to strengthen the positions of domestic companies and the competitiveness of Russian goods on world markets. In order to achieve these goals, Russia has everything: an economy gathering the pace of development, a powerful scientific and technological potential, responsible leaders and managers, high-class specialists, hardworking workers and rural laborers. And most important, Russia has a wise, far-sighted, deeply moral nationwide leader who enjoys the support of the whole people—V. V. Putin—who is able to determine the main vectors of the country’s development, to set key tasks, and to achieve their complete and timely fulfillment. As the history of humankind shows, and also the path traveled by Russia itself in the 21st century, this is the most important condition for the success of any state.

---------- p. 167 ----------

Bibliography

Андреев, И.Л. История России с древнейших времен до 1861 года: Учебник для бакалавров / Н.И. Павленко, И.Л. Андреев, В.А. Фёдоров; Под ред. Н.И. Павленко. – М.: Юрайт, ИД Юрайт, 2012. Анисимов, Е.В. История России от Рюрика до Путина. Люди. События. Даты / Е.В. Анисимов. – СПб.: Питер, 2013. Анисимов Е.В. Время Петровских реформ. – Л., 1989. Барабанов В.В., Николаев И.М., Рожков Б.Г. История России с древнейших времен до конца XX века: Уч. пособие. – М.: АСТ, Астрель, 2003. Безбородов, А.Б. История России в новейшее время. 1985–2009 гг.: Учебник / А.Б. Безбородов. – М.: Проспект, 2013. Березовая Л.Г., Берлякова Н.П. История русской культуры: Учеб. для студ. высш. учеб. заведений. Ч. II. – М., 2002. Берия, Л.П. Сокровенные дневники и личные записи. Самое полное издание / Лаврентий Берия. – М.: Яуза - пресс, 2019. Боханов А.Н. Новейшая история России: Учебник. – М.: Проспект, 2013. Брашинский И.Б. В поисках скифских сокровищ. – Л., 1979. Буганов В.И., Зырянов П.И. История России с восемнадцатого века до конца девятнадцатого, часть 2. – М., 1995. Бурждалов Э.Н. Вторая русская революция. Восстание в Петрограде. – М., 1967. Бурлацкий Ф.М. Русские государи. Эпоха реформации. – М., 1996. Вдовин А.И. СССР . История великой державы (1922 -1991 гг.). – М.: РГ–Пресс, 2019. Вернадский Г.В. История России. Киевская Русь. – Тверь; М., 1996. Вернадский Г.В. Монголы и Русь. – Тверь, М., 1997. Вовина-Лебедева, В.Г. История России. XVI–XVII вв.: Учебное пособие для студентов учреждений высшего профессионального образования / В.Г. Вовина-Лебедева. – М.: ИЦ Академия, 2012. Вурста, Н.И. История России: Даты, события, личности / Н.И. Вурста. – Рн/Д: Феникс, 2013. Вяземский Ю.П. От Павла I до Николая II. История России в

---------- p. 168 ----------

вопросах и ответах. – М.: АСТ, 2014.

Герасимов, Г.И. История России (1985–2008 годы): Учебное пособие / Г.И. Герасимов. – М.: ИЦ РИОР , НИЦ ИНФР А-М., 2013. Глущенко Е.А. Россия в Средней Азии. Завоевания и преобразования. – М.: ЗАО Издательство Центрполиграф, 2010. Голенков А.Н. Сталин без наветов. Только факты. – Второе изд., исправленное и дополненное. – М.: Форум, 1998. Гражданская война в России: Перекрёсток мнений. – М., 1996. Греков Г.В. Киевская Русь. – М., 1953. Гумилёв Л.Н. От Руси к России. – М., 1992. Данилов А.А. История России с древнейших времён до наших дней в вопросах и ответах. – М.: Проспект, 2010. Данилов А.А., Пыжиков А.В. Рождение сверхдержавы. СССР в первые послевоенные годы. – М.: РОССПЭН, 2001. Древнерусские княжества X–XIII вв. – М., 1975. Емельянов, Ю.В. Генералиссимус Сталин / Ю.В. Емельянов. – М.: Вече, 2015. Емельянов Ю.В. Сталин. На вершине власти. – М.: Вече, 2007. Емельянов Ю.В. Сталин. Путь к власти. – М.: Вече, 2007. Емельянов Ю.В. Сталин перед судом пигмеев. – М.: Яуза, Эксмо, 2008. Жуков В.И., Еськов Г.С., Павлова В.С. История России. Учебное пособие. – М.: Союз, 1998. Жуков Г.К. Воспоминания и размышления. – М., 1991. – Т. 1–3. Жукова, Л.В. История России в датах: справочник / Л.В. Жукова, Л.А. Кацва. – М.: Проспект, 2013. Заборовский Л.В. Речь Посполитая и Швеция в середине XVII в. – М., 1981. Зверев, А.Г. Сталин и деньги / Арсений Зверев. – М.: Вече, 2018. Звягинцев, А.Г. История Российской прокуратуры. 1722-2012 гг. Краткое изложение истории прокуратуры в лицах, событиях, документах / А.Г. Звягинцев. – М.: Олма Медиа Гр., 2012. Зезина М.Р . История русской культуры. – М., 1990. Земсков, В.Н. Сталин и народ. Почему не было восстания / Виктор Земсков. – М.: Родина, 2019. Земцов, Б.Н. История России. IX – начало ХХI в: Учебное пособие / Б.Н. Земцов. – М.: Изд. Универ. книга, 2012.

---------- p. 169 ----------

Зимин А.А., Хорошкевич А.Л. Россия времён Ивана Грозного. –

М., 1982.

Золотарев, В.А. Военная история России / В.А. Золотарёв, О.В.

Саксонов, С.А. Тюшкевич. – М.: Кучково поле, 2012.

Зуев, М.Н. История России: Учебное пособие для бакалавров /

М.Н. Зуев. – М.: Юрайт, 2013.

Искендеров А.А. Закат империи. – М., 2001.

Карамзин Н.М. История государства Российского. – M., 1993.

Кара-Мурза Г. Советская цивилизация. От начала до Великой

Победы. – М., 2002.

Катасонов В.Ю. Россия и Запад в двадцатом веке: История экономического противостояния и сосуществования. – М.: Изд. дом «Кислород», 2019. Катасонов В.Ю. Экономика Сталина. – М.: Институт русской цивилизации, 2014. Кацва Л.А. История России. Советский период (1917–1991 гг.): Уч. пособие. – М.: РГУ , 2003. Киселёв А.Ф., Попов В.П. История России. XX начало XXI века. 11 класс. Базовый уровень. Учебник. – 5-е изд., стереотип. – М.: Дрофа, 2012. Кириллов, В.В. История России: Учебное пособие / В.В. Кириллов. – М.: Юрайт, ИД Юрайт, 2010. Кириллов, В.В. История России: Учебное пособие для бакалавров / В.В. Кириллов. – М.: Юрайт, 2013. Ключевский В.О. Исторические портреты. – М., 1991. Кожинов В.В. Россия. Век XX-й (1939-1964). – М., 2002. Кононова, А.В. История России в картинах русских художников / А.В. Кононова. – М.: АСТ, Сова, 2010. Коняев, Н.М. Православная история России: От Крещения до наших дней / Н.М. Коняев. – М.: Вече, 2011. Кофанов А. Русский царь Иосиф Сталин. Издание доработанное и дополненное. – М.: ЗАО «Центрполиграф», 2015. Кривошеев, М.В. История России: Конспект лекций / М.В. Кривошеев, М.В. Ходяков. – М.: Высш. обр., Юрайт-Издат, 2009. Кузьмин А.Г. Начало Руси. – М., 2003. Кузнецов, И.Н. История России в таблицах и схемах / И.Н. Кузнецов. – Мн.: Букмастер, 2013.

---------- p. 170 ----------

Кучкин В. А. Формирование государственной территории Северо-Восточной Руси в X–XIII вв. – М., 1982. Лимонов В.А. Владимиро-Суздальская Русь. Очерки соц.политической истории. – Л., 1987. Лысак И.В. История России с древн. времен до конца XIX века. – Таганрог: Изд-во ТРТУ , 2001. Медведев Р .А. Владимир Путин: четыре года в Кремле. – М., 2004. Медведев Р .А. Владимир Путин: третьего срока не будет? – М., 2007. Медведев Р .А. Н.С. Хрущёв. Политическая биография. – М., 1990. Мехлис, Л.З. Тень вождя / Лев Мехлис.- М.: Яуза - Каталог, 2018. Михайлова Р .В. История русской культуры. – Л., 1980. Мунчаев,Ш.М. История России: Учебник / Ш.М. Мунчаев, В.М. У стинов. – М.: Норма, НИЦ ИНФР А-М., 2013. На пороге кризиса: нарастание застойных явлений в партии и обществе / Под общ. ред. В.В. Журавлёва. – М., 1990. Нарочницкая Н.А. Россия и русские в мировой истории. – М., 2004. Нестеренко, Е.И. История России: Учебно-практическое пособие / Е.И. Нестеренко. – М.: Вузовский учебник, ИНФР А-М., 2012. Орлов, А.С. История России: Учебник / А.С. Орлов, В.А. Георгиев, Н.Г. Георгиева, Т.А. Сивохина. – М.: Проспект, 2013. Островский В.П., Уткин А.И. История России. – М., 1995. Павленко, Н.И. История России / Н.И. Павленко, И.Л. Андреев, Л.М. Ляшенко. М.: Абрис, 2012. Парсамов, В.С. История России: XVIII – начало XX века: Учебное пособие для студентов учреждений высшего профессионального образования / В.С. Парсамов. – М.: ИЦ Академия, 2013. Пашков Б.Г. Русь, Россия, Российская империя. – М., 1997. Первые века русской истории. – М., 1964. Перестройка: двадцать лет спустя/Сост. В.И. Толстых. – М., 2005. Платонов С.Ф. Иван Грозный. – М., 1973. Платонов С.Ф. Очерки смуты в Московском государстве в XVI– XVII вв. – М., 1995.

---------- p. 171 ----------

Повесть временных лет. – М., Л., 1990.

Поляк Г.Б. Послевоенное восстановление народного хозяйства.

– М., 1986.

Пушкарев С.Г. Обзор русской истории. – М., 1991.

Пятецкий Л.М. История России: Восточные славяне в древности. – М.: Московский лицей, 1996. Ратьковский, И.С. Новейшая история России. 1914-2011 гг.: Учебное пособие для бакалавров / И.С. Ратьковский. – М.: Юрайт, 2013. Рыбаков Б.А. Киевская Русь и русские княжества в XII–XIII вв.

– М., 1982.

Рыбаков Б.А. Первые века русской истории. – М., 1964.

Самсонов А.М. Крах фашистской агрессии 1939–1945 гг. – М., 1980. Сафразьян, А.Л. История России. Конспект лекций: Учебное пособие / А.Л. Сафразьян. – М.: Проспект, 2013. Сахаров A.M., Буганов В.И. История России с древнейших времён до конца семнадцатого века, часть 1. – М., 1995. Семанов С.Н. Брежнев. Правитель «золотого века». – М.: Вече, 2006. Сёмин, В.П. История России: Учебник / В.П. Сёмин. – М.: КноРус, 2013. Сизенко, А.Г. История России. Великие события: Также выходит под названием 111 выдающихся событий в истории России / А.Г. Сизенко. – Рн/Д: Владис, 2011. Скрынников Р .Г. Великий государь Иоанн Васильевич Грозный: в 2-х т. – Смоленск, 1996. Согрин В.Б. Политическая история современной России: от Горбачёва до Путина. – М., 2001. Соловьёв, С.М. История России с древнейших времён / С.М. Соловьёв. – М.: Эксмо, 2013. Соловьёв, С.М. История России. Русь древняя / С.М. Соловьёв. – М.: Олма Медиа Гр., 2013. Соловьёв, С.М. История России. Русь княжеская / С.М. Соловьёв. – М.: Олма Медиа Гр., 2013. Соловьёв, С.М. История России. Русь под пятой татаро-монголов / С.М. Соловьёв. – М.: Олма Медиа Гр., 2013.

---------- p. 172 ----------

Соловьёв, С.М. История России. Становление Московской Руси

/ С.М. Соловьёв. – М.: Олма Медиа Гр., 2013.

Спицын Е.Ю. Осень Патриарха. Советская держава в 1945 –1953 годах. – М.: Концептуал, 2018. Стариков Н.В. Сталин. Вспоминаем вместе. – СПб.: Питер, 2013. Стариков, Н.В. Сталин. После войны. Книга 1.1945-1948 / Николай Стариков. – М.: Эксмо, 2019. Татищев, В. Русь Домосковская: История Российская во всей её полноте / В. Татищев. – М.: Алгоритм, 2013. Твардовская В.А. Александр III // Российские самодержцы (1801–1917 гг.). – М., 1993. Уткин А.И. Вторая мировая война. – М., 2003. Федоров, В.А. История России. 1861–1917 гг.: Учебник для бакалавров / В.А. Фёдоров. – М.: Юрайт, ИД Юрайт, 2013. Фейхтвангер Л. Москва 1937: Отчёт о поездке для моих друзей. – М.: Художественная литература, 1937 (первое русское издание, прижизненное). Флоря Б.Н. Иван Грозный. – М., 1999. Хрестоматия по истории России с древних времён до наших дней. – М., 1999. Хуторский В.Я. История России. Советская эпоха (1917-1993 гг.). – М., 1995. Чигирин И.И. Белые и грязные пятна истории. О тайне смерти И.В. Сталина и некоторых обстоятельствах его правления. – Великие Луки, 2008. Шевякин А.П. Кто готовил развал СССР . – М.: Алгоритм, 2014. Школьник, Ю.К. История России: От древнейших времён до начала XX века: Полная энциклопедия / К. Школьник. – М.: Эксмо, 2012.

---------- p. 173 ----------

Contents

Chapter I. ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL RUS'

The East Slavs in ancient times 8

Kievan Rus' and the first Russian princes 12

The flowering of Kievan Rus' 16

Rus' on the path to fragmentation 19

The breakup of Kievan Rus' 21

The Vladimir-Suzdal principality 22

The Principality of Galicia–Volhynia 23

The Novgorod Land 24

Invasions of foreign conquerors of the Russian lands 26

The Mongol invasion and the vassal dependence of Rus' 26

The struggle of the Russian people against Western aggression 30

The Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Rus' 32

The creation of a unified Russian state 34

The era of Ivan the Terrible 38

Expansion of the lands 40

The Livonian War 41

The oprichnina 42

The reign of Boris Godunov 45

The Time of Troubles 46

The expulsion of foreigners 48

The beginning of the Romanov dynasty. The first Romanovs 50

Chapter II. THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE

The era of Peter the Great 57

The foreign policy of Peter I 59

The reforms of Peter I 62

The palace coups 68

Catherine II. The policy of “enlightened absolutism” 71

The golden age of the nobility 72

Pugachev's Rebellion 73

The crisis of the serf system. Russia at the beginning of the 19th century 78

The Patriotic War of 1812 79

The Decembrist revolt 81

---------- p. 174 ----------

The reaction under Nicholas I 82

The Crimean War 85

Russia in the age of capitalism. The emancipation of the serfs 86

The development of capitalism 87

The Narodnik movement 88

The counter-reforms of Alexander III 89

The spread of Marxism 91

Russia in the second half of the 19th century 92

The progressive consequences of the annexation

of Central Asia to Russia 93

Russia in wars and revolutions 95

The Russo-Japanese War 97

The Revolution of 1905 98

World War I and the end of the monarchy 100

Chapter III. NEW RUSSIA

The Great Russian Revolution 102

The consolidation and development of the Soviet system 104

The Civil War 105

The formation of the USSR 107

The NEP period 108

Industrialization and collectivization 109

The USSR in the 1920s–1930s 112

The rise of the USSR as a world power.

The foreign policy of the USSR in the 1920s–1930s 115

The Great Patriotic War 116

International relations during World War II 120

The postwar restoration of the national economy of the USSR 122 The Cold War and the formation of two camps 125 The beginning of the Thaw 126 Economic and administrative reforms of the 1950s 127 The Era of Stagnation 131 Perestroika and the breakup of the USSR 136 Afterword to the section on the Soviet era 141 Russia in the 1990s–early 21st century 151 Bibliography 167

---------- p. 175 ----------

[page without text]

---------- p. 176 ----------

HISTORY OF RUSSIA

in brief outline

A textbook for labor migrants

Editor - Natalya Migitenko

Technical editor - Elena Kuryleva

Proofreader - Svetlana Leshan

Printed and bound at the printing house of Poligraf-Master LLC, Chelyabinsk, Akademika Koroleva St., 26 tel.: (351) 281-01-64, 281-01-65, 281-01-66 E-mail: P-master74@mail.ru Signed for printing 31.08.2020. Conventional printer’s sheets 12.5. Typeface Times New Roman. Print run 5,000 copies.
